Magic paths:

Based primarily on mana sources

Mana Sources:

Wizard: Through study and practice learned to manipluate the ambiently leaking mana leading to a low-power but high-complexity style

Sorcerer: Through some means or another your body generates mana, but you aren't trained in its use, leading to a high-power and low complexity, instinctive, kinetic, elemental, and raw power approach to magic.

Cleric [paladin]/Warlock: You asked your ~~sugar daddy~~ god for power. They gave it to you, but only for use in certain ways and for a price. Often (though not always) cannot use magic components of opposing alignment to their patron. Evil alignment patrons may often provide a companion in the form of a familiar or a sentient weapon to keep watch on the recipient of their power. Paladins are just warriors that dipped into Cleric a bit.

Bard: Manipulate power through vibrations in the air, generally through an instrument. The type of mana involved generally tends to lend itself to spells that affect light, sound, and living beings, often affecting perception (illusions), the mind (mental attacks), or living bodies (buffs/debuffs).

Artificer: Often failed wizards that never could get the hang of handling magic, but still understood the theory better than most, ended up learning to inscribe spells into their items, specializing in long-term magic and crafting magical tools and weapons.

Monks: Spending much time focusing on understanding their bodies, monks learned to control and enhance the magic flowing through themselves in order to empower themselves in strength, dexterity, and durability.

Druid [ranger]: Draws power from surrounding life, primarily focused on healing, growth, transformation, and creation, usually manipulating tbe power on instinct and without fine control but capable of surprising intricacy. Also proficient in interactions with plants and animals, allowing for translation, control, and polymorphing. In most cases uses magic to cause matter to emulate effects rather than truly performing them due to the power requirements involved in transformation and creation. Rangers are warriors or hunters who dipped into Druid a bit.